486 Gabrielor very much improved upon completing a 6-week Montgomery and Asberg, 1979] score 430 werelamotrigine augmentation trial. Two small, placebo- included. Modified criteria from Thase and Rushcontrolled trials also provide evidence for the anti- [1997]wereusedtoclassifytreatment-resistantdepres-depressant efficacy of lamotrigine. In the first con- sion (TRD): Grade 1, absence of response to onetrolled trial (n523), lamotrigine was superior to antidepressant; Grade2, absence ofresponsetotwo orplacebo in patients receiving fluoxetine for resistant more antidepressants, one of them from a differentdepression. Patients were treated with fluoxetine, group; Grade 3, absence of response to combination20mg/day, and concomitantly randomly assigned to and/or augmentation strategy; Grade 4, Grade 31receiveeitherlamotrigineorplacebofor6weeks.Both absence of response to an irreversible monoaminepatients with major depressive disorder and bipolar II oxidase inhibitor; Grade 5, Grade 31absence ofdisorder were enrolled in the study. Clinical Global response to electroconvulsive therapy (ECT; Table 1).Impression Severity scale (CGI-S) scores improved in All patients were rated as moderately to severely illpatients with major depressive disorder and those with prior to the adjunctive treatment and functioningbipolar II disorder in the lamotrigine-treated group poorly, and three patients had also failed ECTand/or[Barbosa et al., 2003]. In the second randomized, transcranial magnetic stimulation trials, as well as theplacebo-controlled study, lamotrigine was studied in antidepressants trials(Table1).Patientswithpsychoticpatients(n540)withnonresistantunipolardepression. disorders, alcohol or drug abuse, and eating disordersAllpatientsweretreatedwithparoxetine.Howeverthe were excluded, and all patients remained compliantparoxetine–lamotrigineadjunctivegroupdemonstrated with the adjuctive treatment of lamotrigine for at leastmore significant improvement on core depressive 6 months. Patients provided informed consent, ap-symptoms as reflected by Hamilton Depression Scale provedbytheUniversityofCalgaryConjointScientific(HAM-D) items for depressed mood, guilt feelings, and Ethics Board.work, and interest [Normann et al., 2002]. Also in a Lamotrigine was added to existing antidepressants,more recent retrospective chart review of the efficacy andthedosewastitrated,accordingtoclinicalresponseandtolerabilityoflamotrigineasanaugmentationdrug and tolerance, with 25- to 50-mg increments everyin treatment-resistant unipolar depression, 76% of 2weeks,toamaximumdoseof200mg/day.Werecordedpatients (n525) were rated as improved [Rocha and patients’ demographic data and scores of effectivenessHara, 2003]. Lamotrigine was, however, evaluated for measurescompletedprospectivelyinpatients’chartsinits antidepressant efficacy and safety in unipolar follow-up visits for at least 6 months of adjuvantdepression in a number of GlaxoSmithKline-spon- treatment. Efficacy measures included changes of thesored, multicenter, placebo-controlled, randomized following scales at baseline (before adding lamotri-trials. Although some of these trials reported that gine), at 8 weeks, and at 6 months: the CGI-Spatients on lamotrigine experienced more improve- [National Institute of Mental Health, 1970], as thement,thedifferencesbetweenlamotrigineandplacebo primaryefficacymeasure,theMADRS,andtheGlobalwere not statistically significant on any of the efficacy Assessment of Functioning Scale [GAF; Luborsky,measuresused[DeVeaugh-Geissetal.,2000;Laurenza 1962]. We paired baseline measures, prior to addinget al., 1999; Londborg et al., 1999]. lamotrigine, with those at 8 weeks and at 6 monthsTolerability and safety of lamotrigine has been after adding lamotrigine, utilizing a paired t-test.established in at least eight placebo-controlled clinical A qualified psychiatrist carried out ratings, andtrials, with an adverse-event profile generally compar- no interrater reliability measures were taken.able with that of placebo, when it is used asmonotherapy or as an adjunctive therapy. Serious rash TABLE 1. Patients’ demographicsoccurred rarely (0.1% incidence), and headaches wasthe commonest side effect [Goodwin et al., 2004]. DemographicdataN514 M(SD)Lamotrigine can be safely combined with mostAge 45(11.9)psychotropic drugs [Reimers et al., 2005].Sex(M/F) 5/9Illnessduration(years) 11.5(10)METHODS Durationofcurrentepisode(months) 20(8)Numberoffailedantidepressanttrials 4(2)Fourteen patients, both males and females between Numberofprevioushospitalizationsfordepression 1(0.9)ages 18 and 65, with DSM-IV-R diagnosis of unipolar Averagelamotriginedosage(mg) 125(55)depression were included in the study. Diagnosis was Numberofrelapsesduringthetrial 0confirmed by the Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Classificationoftreatmentresistancea PatientsInterview[MINI;SheehanandLecrubier,2001–2005]. Substitutionwithadifferentantidepressant 3Only patients who had failed to respond to at least Twoormoreantidepressantsofdifferentclass 4Combination/augmentation 5two 8-week trials of antidepressant treatment, defined(e.g.moodstabilizersornovelantipsychotics)as failure to respond with 450% reduction inECTandtranscranialmagneticstimulation 2symptoms of depression, as measured by Montgo-mery–A˚sberg Depression Rating Scale [MADRS; aModifiedfromThaseandRush[1997].DepressionandAnxietyDOI10.1002/da