DEPRESSIONANDANXIETY23:485–488 (2006)Brief ReportLAMOTRIGINE ADJUNCTIVE TREATMENT IN RESISTANTUNIPOLAR DEPRESSION: AN OPEN, DESCRIPTIVE STUDY(cid:1)Adel Gabriel, B.M., B.Ch., F.R.C.P.C., D.P.I.P., D.P.M., D.T.M.H.Adjunctive treatment of lamotrigine compared to other antidepressants in thetreatment of partially responsive, poorly functioning patients with unipolardepressionwasassessed.FourteenconsentingpatientswithconfirmedDSM-IV-R diagnosis of unipolar depression were identified as treatment resistant. Allpatients failed at least two 8-week treatment trials with antidepressants. Allweretreatedwithlamotrigineasanadjuncttootherantidepressantsforatleast6 months. The primary effectiveness measure was the Clinical GlobalImpression Severity subscale (CGI-S). Other scales included the Montgomery–˚Asberg Depression Scale (MADRS) and the Global Assessment of FunctioningScale (GAF).Monitoring for skin rashes, headache,dizziness, somnolence, andgastrointestinal disturbances was carried out to assess for adverse events.Baseline measures prior to adding lamotrigine were compared to those at 8weeks and 6 months with adjunctive treatment. Twelve patients of the total(n514) completed the trial, and two discontinued treatment. There wassignificant, rapid, and robust resolution in symptoms in all effectivenessmeasures, including the core symptoms of depression, as shown by the changesfrom baseline in CGI-S, and MADRS at 8 weeks. Social and occupationalfunctioning was significantly improvedat 6 months. Eight patientsreturned togainful employment or started schooling. Patients tolerated the adjunctivelamotrigine treatment well. Lamotrigine may have antidepressant propertiesin patients with unipolar depression and may have an earlier onset of actionwhen given in combination with antidepressants. Depression and Anxiety23:485–488, 2006. &2006Wiley-Liss,Inc.INTRODUCTION A small number of reports suggest some efficacyof lamotrigine in unipolar depression. For example, inInterest in lamotrigine’s possible efficacy in the a retrospective chart review (n537), Barbee andtreatment of mood disorders arose from epilepsy Jamhour [2002] found that 48.4% of patients withstudies that described improved mood and quality of recurrent, resistant major depression were rated muchlife unrelated to seizure control [Barbosa et al., 2003].The first placebo-controlled, randomized study ofFaculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta,lamotrigine as maintenance treatment demonstratedCanadastatistical differences in relapse rates between lamo-(cid:1)trigine and placebo at 6 month in patients with rapid- Correspondence to: Adel Gabriel, B.M., B.Ch., F.R.C.P.C.,cycling bipolar disorder [Calabrese et al., 2000]. D.P.I.P., D.P.M., D.T.M.H., Faculty of Medicine, University ofInapooledanalysisoftwolargemaintenancestudies, Calgary,2000PegasusRoadNECalgary,Alberta,CanadaT2E8K7.E-mail:gabriel@ucalgary.calamotrigine was found to be effective against depres-sion and mania, with more robust activity against Received for publication 30 November 2005; Revised 21 Marchdepression than lithium in patients with bipolar 2006;Accepted7April2006disorders, and lithium was found to be more effective DOI10.1002/da.20211against mania [Bowden et al., 2003; Calabrese et al., Published online 14 July 2006 in Wiley InterScience (www.2003; Goodwin et al., 2004]. interscience.wiley.com).rr2006Wiley-Liss, Inc.