Adjunctive treatment of lamotrigine compared to other antidepressants in the
treatment of partially responsive, poorly functioning patients with unipolar
depression was assessed. Fourteen consenting patients with confirmed DSM-IVR
diagnosis of unipolar depression were identified as treatment resistant. All
patients failed at least two 8-week treatment trials with antidepressants. All
were treated with lamotrigine as an adjunct to other antidepressants for at least
6 months. The primary effectiveness measure was the Clinical Global
Impression Severity subscale (CGI-S). Other scales included the Montgomery–
Asberg Depression Scale (MADRS) and the Global Assessment of Functioning
Scale (GAF). Monitoring for skin rashes, headache, dizziness, somnolence, and
gastrointestinal disturbances was carried out to assess for adverse events.
Baseline measures prior to adding lamotrigine were compared to those at 8
weeks and 6 months with adjunctive treatment. Twelve patients of the total
(n514) completed the trial, and two discontinued treatment. There was
significant, rapid, and robust resolution in symptoms in all effectiveness
measures, including the core symptoms of depression, as shown by the changes
from baseline in CGI-S, and MADRS at 8 weeks. Social and occupational
functioning was significantly improved at 6 months. Eight patients returned to
gainful employment or started schooling. Patients tolerated the adjunctive
lamotrigine treatment well. Lamotrigine may have antidepressant properties
in patients with unipolar depression and may have an earlier onset of action
when given in combination with antidepressants. Depression and Anxiety.
INTRODUCTION
Interest in lamotrigine’s possible efficacy in the
treatment of mood disorders arose from epilepsy
studies that described improved mood and quality of
life unrelated to seizure control [Barbosa et al., 2003].
The first placebo-controlled, randomized study of
lamotrigine as maintenance treatment demonstrated
statistical differences in relapse rates between lamotrigine
and placebo at 6 month in patients with rapidcycling
bipolar disorder [Calabrese et al., 2000].
In a pooled analysis of two large maintenance studies,
lamotrigine was found to be effective against depression
and mania, with more robust activity against
depression than lithium in patients with bipolar
disorders, and lithium was found to be more effective
against mania [Bowden et al., 2003; Calabrese et al.,
2003; Goodwin et al., 2004].
A small number of reports suggest some efficacy
of lamotrigine in unipolar depression. For example, in
a retrospective chart review (n537), Barbee and
Jamhour [2002] found that 48.4% of patients with
recurrent, resistant major depression were rated much or very much improved upon completing a 6-week
lamotrigine augmentation trial. Two small, placebocontrolled
trials also provide evidence for the antidepressant
efficacy of lamotrigine. In the first controlled
trial (n523), lamotrigine was superior to
placebo in patients receiving fluoxetine for resistant
depression. Patients were treated with fluoxetine,
20 mg/day, and concomitantly randomly assigned to
receive either lamotrigine or placebo for 6 weeks. Both
patients with major depressive disorder and bipolar II
disorder were enrolled in the study. Clinical Global
Impression Severity scale (CGI-S) scores improved in
patients with major depressive disorder and those with
bipolar II disorder in the lamotrigine-treated group
[Barbosa et al., 2003]. In the second randomized,
placebo-controlled study, lamotrigine was studied in
patients (n540) with nonresistant unipolar depression.
All patients were treated with paroxetine. However the
paroxetine–lamotrigine adjunctive group demonstrated
more significant improvement on core depressive
symptoms as reflected by Hamilton Depression Scale
(HAM-D) items for depressed mood, guilt feelings,
work, and interest [Normann et al., 2002]. Also in a
more recent retrospective chart review of the efficacy
and tolerability of lamotrigine as an augmentation drug
in treatment-resistant unipolar depression, 76% of
patients (n525) were rated as improved [Rocha and
Hara, 2003]. Lamotrigine was, however, evaluated for
its antidepressant efficacy and safety in unipolar
depression in a number of GlaxoSmithKline-sponsored,
multicenter, placebo-controlled, randomized
trials. Although some of these trials reported that
patients on lamotrigine experienced more improvement,
the differences between lamotrigine and placebo
were not statistically significant on any of the efficacy
measures used [DeVeaugh-Geiss et al., 2000; Laurenza
et al., 1999; Londborg et al., 1999].
Tolerability and safety of lamotrigine has been
established in at least eight placebo-controlled clinical
trials, with an adverse-event profile generally comparable
with that of placebo, when it is used as
monotherapy or as an adjunctive therapy. Serious rash
occurred rarely (0.1% incidence), and headaches was
the commonest side effect [Goodwin et al., 2004].
Lamotrigine can be safely combined with most
psychotropic drugs [Reimers et al., 2005].
METHODS
Fourteen patients, both males and females between
ages 18 and 65, with DSM-IV-R diagnosis of unipolar
depression were included in the study. Diagnosis was
confirmed by the Mini-International Neuropsychiatric
Interview [MINI; Sheehan and Lecrubier, 2001–2005].
Only patients who had failed to respond to at least
two 8-week trials of antidepressant treatment, defined
as failure to respond with >50% reduction in
symptoms of depression, as measured by Montgomery–
Asberg Depression Rating Scale [MADRS; Montgomery and Asberg, 1979] score 430 were
included. Modified criteria from Thase and Rush
[1997] were used to classify treatment-resistant depression
(TRD): Grade 1, absence of response to one
antidepressant; Grade 2, absence of response to two or
more antidepressants, one of them from a different
group; Grade 3, absence of response to combination
and/or augmentation strategy; Grade 4, Grade 31
absence of response to an irreversible monoamine
oxidase inhibitor; Grade 5, Grade 31absence of
response to electroconvulsive therapy (ECT; Table 1).
All patients were rated as moderately to severely ill
prior to the adjunctive treatment and functioning
poorly, and three patients had also failed ECT and/or
transcranial magnetic stimulation trials, as well as the
antidepressants trials (Table 1). Patients with psychotic
disorders, alcohol or drug abuse, and eating disorders
were excluded, and all patients remained compliant
with the adjuctive treatment of lamotrigine for at least
6 months. Patients provided informed consent, approved
by the University of Calgary Conjoint Scientific
and Ethics Board.
Lamotrigine was added to existing antidepressants,
and the dose was titrated, according to clinical response
and tolerance, with 25- to 50-mg increments every
2 weeks, to a maximum dose of 200 mg/day.We recorded
patients’ demographic data and scores of effectiveness
measures completed prospectively in patients’ charts in
follow-up visits for at least 6 months of adjuvant
treatment. Efficacy measures included changes of the
following scales at baseline (before adding lamotrigine),
at 8 weeks, and at 6 months: the CGI-S
[National Institute of Mental Health, 1970], as the
primary efficacy measure, the MADRS, and the Global
Assessment of Functioning Scale [GAF; Luborsky,
1962]. We paired baseline measures, prior to adding
lamotrigine, with those at 8 weeks and at 6 months
after adding lamotrigine, utilizing a paired t-test.
A qualified psychiatrist carried out ratings, and
no interrater reliability measures were taken.
Monitoring for skin rashes, headache, dizziness,
somnolence, and gastrointestinal (GI) disturbances
was carried out to assess tolerance to adjunctive
treatments [Bowden et al., 2004]. Patients were
instructed to stop the drug, and to report rashes
immediately should they develop. All patients in
follow-up visits were asked about headache, dizziness,
somnolence, and insomnia, in addition to skin rashes.

RESULTS
Table 1 displays demographic variables, details of the
current illness, and data on past failed biological
treatment trials. Twelve patients (85.7%) completed
the 6-month trial of the adjuvant treatment. Lamotrigine
dosage ranged from 50 mg/day to 200 mg/day.
At the time of adding lamotrigine, nine patients were
on one antidepressant (citalopram or venlafaxine), and
five patients were on two or more antidepressants. In
addition to the significant improvement of the core
symptoms of depressive symptomatology at 8 weeks
and at 6 months, some patients had recognizable
clinical improvement within the first 2 weeks (Table 2).
On the primary efficacy measure at 6 months, there was
at least a 1 point change, from moderately ill to mildly ill
at week 8, and further improvement by 2 points, from
mildly ill to borderline. At 6 months, four patients were
very much improved, seven were much improved, one was
minimally improved, and two displayed no change on the
CGI Improvement (CGI-I) subscale. Two female
patients discontinued lamotrigine at week 8: one due
to the development of a scalp rash, which was not
verified, and the other due to travel. These two patients
did not report significant changes or improvements.
Table 2 summarizes the efficacy measures findings.
Occupational and Social Functioning: Eight patients
returned to gainful employment and resumed regular
leisure activities. For example, a 62-year-old male
resumed playing hockey. A 55-year-old female who had
suffered from nonremitting symptoms for 6 years, and who had failed an ECT trial and a recent trial of
transcranial magnetic stimulation, reported robust
mood improvement and relief of associated anxiety.
A lawyer who had been nonfunctional for 4 years
started part-time work.
Tolerance: Reported side effects were generally mild
and transient. Two patients reported mild drowsiness,
somnolence, and decrease in sexual desire; one patient
reported mild transient headaches and dizziness, and
another complained of dry mouth and nervousness.
One patient discontinued the treatments after 8 weeks
due to the development of a scalp rash, which was not
verified.

DISCUSSION
Lamotrigine may have antidepressant properties in
patients with unipolar depression and may accelerate
the onset of action when given in combination with
atypical antidepressants. Large-scale, double-blind
studies are critically needed to explore further the
efficacy and tolerability of lamotrigine treatment in
unipolar depression.
Clinical Implications: Clinicians will (1) consider
lamotrigine as an adjunct to antidepressants in TRD;
(2) initiate large-scale, controlled trials to test lamotrigine’s
efficacy and tolerability in unipolar depression;
and (3) recognize that lamotrigine is generally a safe
drug if patients are monitored carefully.
Limitations: Limitations include small sample size,
open design, and heterogeneous antidepressant
that patients were taking at the time lamotrigine was
added.

