Introduction
Major depressive disorder is a leading cause of
disability worldwide and has been found to lower life
satisfaction more than debt, divorce, and diabetes and to exacerbate comorbidities, including heart
disease, anxiety, and cancer. Although people with
major depressive disorder often respond well to drug
treatments and psychotherapy, many are resistant to
treatment. In addition, access to treatment for many
people with depression is limited, with only 51%
treatment coverage for high income countries and 20%
for low and lower-middle income countries. More
evidence based treatments are therefore needed.
Exercise may be an effective complement or
alternative to drugs and psychotherapy. In addition
to mental health benefits, exercise also improves a
range of physical and cognitive outcomes. Clinical
practice guidelines in the US, UK, and Australia
recommend physical activity as part of treatment for
depression. But these guidelines do not provide
clear, consistent recommendations about dose or
exercise modality. British guidelines recommend
group exercise programmes and offer general
recommendations to increase any form of physical
activity, the American Psychiatric Association
recommends any dose of aerobic exercise or resistance
training, and Australian and New Zealand guidelines suggest a combination of strength and vigorous aerobic
exercises, with at least two or three bouts weekly. Authors of guidelines may find it hard to provide
consistent recommendations on the basis of existing
mainly pairwise meta-analyses—that is, assessing
a specific modality versus a specific comparator in
a distinct group of participants. These meta-analyses have come under scrutiny for pooling
heterogeneous treatments and heterogenous
comparisons leading to ambiguous effect estimates. Reviews also face the opposite problem, excluding
exercise treatments such as yoga, tai chi, and qigong because grouping them with strength training might
be inappropriate. Overviews of reviews have tried
to deal with this problem by combining pairwise
meta-analyses on individual treatments. A recent
such overview found no differences between exercise
modalities. Comparing effect sizes between different
pairwise meta-analyses can also lead to confusion
because of differences in analytical methods used
between meta-analysis, such as choice of a control
to use as the referent. Network meta-analyses
are a better way to precisely quantify differences
between interventions as they simultaneously model the direct and indirect comparisons between
interventions. Network meta-analyses have been used to compare
different types of psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy
for depression. For exercise, they have shown that
dose and modality influence outcomes for cognition, back pain, and blood pressure. Two network meta-analyses explored the effects of exercise on depression:
one among older adults and the other for mental
health conditions. Because of the inclusion criteria
and search strategies used, these reviews might have
been under-powered to explore moderators such as
dose and modality (κ=15 and κ=71, respectively).
To resolve conflicting findings in existing reviews,
we comprehensively searched randomised trials on
exercise for depression to ensure our review was
adequately powered to identify the optimal dose and
modality of exercise. For example, a large overview of
reviews found effects on depression to be proportional
to intensity, with vigorous exercise appearing to be
better, but a later meta-analysis found no such
effects. We explored whether recommendations
differ based on participants’ sex, age, and baseline
level of depression. Given the challenges presented by behaviour
change in people with depression, we also identified
autonomy support or behaviour change techniques
that might improve the effects of intervention. Behaviour change techniques such as self-monitoring
and action planning have been shown to influence the
effects of physical activity interventions in adults (>18
years) and older adults (>60 years) with differing
effectiveness of techniques in different populations. We
therefore tested whether any intervention components
from the behaviour change technique taxonomy were
associated with higher or lower intervention effects. Other meta-analyses found that physical activity
interventions work better when they provide people
with autonomy (eg, choices, invitational language).
Autonomy is not well captured in the taxonomy for
behaviour change technique. We therefore tested
whether effects were stronger in studies that provided
more autonomy support to patients. Finally, to
understand the mechanism of intervention effects,
such as self-confidence, affect, and physical fitness, we
collated all studies that conducted formal mediation
analyses.
Methods.
Our findings are presented according to the Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and MetaAnalyses-Network Meta-analyses (PRISMA-NMA)
guidelines (see supplementary file, section S0; all
supplementary files, data, and code are also available
at https://osf.io/nzw6u/). We amended our analysis
strategy after registering our review; these changes
were to better align with new norms established
by the Cochrane Comparing Multiple Interventions
Methods Group. These norms were introduced
between the publication of our protocol and the
preparation of this manuscript. The largest change was using the confidence in network meta-analysis
(CINeMA) online tool instead of the Grading of
Recommendations, Assessment, Development and
Evaluation (GRADE) guidelines and adopting methods
to facilitate assessments—for example, instead of
using an omnibus test for all treatments, we assessed
publication bias for each treatment compared with
active controls. We also modelled acceptability
(through dropout rate), which was not predefined but
was adopted in response to a reviewer’s comment.
Eligibility criteria.
To be eligible for inclusion, studies had to be
randomised controlled trials that included exercise as
a treatment for depression and included participants
who met the criteria for major depressive disorder,
either clinician diagnosed or identified through
participant self-report as exceeding established clinical
thresholds (eg, scored >13 on the Beck depression
inventory-II). Studies could meet these criteria
when all the participants had depression or when the
study reported depression outcomes for a subgroup of
participants with depression at the start of the study.
We defined exercise as “planned, structured
and repetitive bodily movement done to improve
or maintain one or more components of physical
fitness.” Unlike recent reviews, we included
studies with more than one exercise arm and
multifaceted interventions (eg, health and exercise
counselling) as long as they contained a substantial
exercise component. These trials could be included
because network meta-analysis methods allows for
the grouping of those interventions into homogenous
nodes. Unlike the most recent Cochrane review, we
also included participants with physical comorbidities
such as arthritis and participants with postpartum
depression because the Diagnostic Statistical Manual
of Mental Health Disorders, fifth edition, removed the
postpartum onset specifier after that analysis was
completed. Studies were excluded if interventions
were shorter than one week, depression was not
reported as an outcome, and data were insufficient to
calculate an effect size for each arm. Any comparison
condition was included, allowing us to quantify the
effects against established treatments (eg, selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), cognitive
behavioural therapy), active control conditions (usual
care, placebo tablet, stretching, educational control,
and social support), or waitlist control conditions.
Published and unpublished studies were included,
with no restrictions on language applied.
Information sources.
We adapted the search strategy from the most recent
Cochrane review, adding keywords for yoga, tai chi,
and qigong, as they met our definition for exercise.
We conducted database searches, without filters or
date limits, in The Cochrane Library via CENTRAL,
SPORTDiscus via Embase, and Medline, Embase, and
PsycINFO via Ovid. We assessed
full texts of all included studies from two systematic
reviews of exercise for depression.
Results.
Study selection.
The PRISMA flow diagram outlines the study selection
process (fig 1). We used two previous reviews to identify
potentially eligible studies for inclusion. Database
searches identified 18658 possible studies. After
5505 duplicates had been removed, two reviewers
independently screened 13115 titles and abstracts.
After screening, two reviewers independently reviewed
1738 full text articles. Supplementary file section S2
shows the consensus reasons for exclusion. A total
of 218 unique studies described in 246 reports were
included, totalling 495 arms and 14170 participants.
Supplementary file section S3 lists the references and
characteristics of the included studies.
Discussion.
Summary of evidence.
In this systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomised controlled trials, exercise showed
moderate effects on depression compared with active controls, either alone or in combination with
other established treatments such as cognitive
behaviour therapy. In isolation, the most effective
exercise modalities were walking or jogging, yoga,
strength training, and dancing. Although walking
or jogging were effective for both men and women,
strength training was more effective for women,
and yoga or qigong was more effective for men. Yoga
was somewhat more effective among older adults,
and strength training was more effective among younger people. The benefits from exercise tended
to be proportional to the intensity prescribed, with
vigorous activity being better. Benefits were equally
effective for different weekly doses, for people with
different comorbidities, or for different baseline levels
of depression. Although confidence in many of the
results was low, treatment guidelines may be overly
conservative by conditionally recommending exercise
as complementary or alternative treatment for patients
in whom psychotherapy or pharmacotherapy is either
ineffective or unacceptable. Instead, guidelines for
depression ought to include prescriptions for exercise
and consider adapting the modality to participants’
characteristics and recommending more vigorous
intensity exercises.
Our review did not uncover clear causal
mechanisms, but the trends in the data are useful for
generating hypotheses. It is unlikely that any single
causal mechanism explains all the findings in the
review. Instead, we hypothesise that a combination
of social interaction, mindfulness or experiential
acceptance, increased self-efficacy, immersion in
green spaces, neurobiological mechanisms, and
acute positive affect combine to generate outcomes.
Meta-analyses have found each of these factors to be
associated with decreases in depressive symptoms,
but no single treatment covers all mechanisms. Some
may more directly promote mindfulness (eg, yoga),
be more social (eg, group exercise), be conducted in
green spaces (eg, walking), provide a more positive
affect (eg, “runner’s high”’), or be more conducive to
acute adaptations that may increase self-efficacy (eg,
strength). Exercise modalities such as running may
satisfy many of the mechanisms, but they are unlikely
to directly promote the mindful self-awareness
provided by yoga and qigong. Both these forms of
exercise are often practised in groups with explicit
mindfulness but seldom have fast and objective
feedback loops that improve self-efficacy. Adequately
powered studies testing multiple mediators may help
to focus more on understanding why exercise helps
depression and less on whether exercise helps. We
argue that understanding these mechanisms of action
is important for personalising prescriptions and better
understanding effective treatments.
Our review included more studies than many
existing reviews on exercise for depression.
As a result, we were able to combine the strengths
of various approaches to exercise and to make more
nuanced and precise conclusions. For example, even
taking conservative estimates (ie, the least favourable
end of the credible interval), practitioners can expect
patients to experience clinically significant effects
from walking, running, yoga, qigong, strength
training, and mixed aerobic exercise. Because we
simultaneously assessed more than 200 studies,
credible intervals were narrower than those in most
existing meta-analyses. We were also able to explore
non-linear relationships between outcomes and
moderators, such as frequency, intensity, and time.
These analyses supported some existing findings—for
example, our study and the study by Heissel et al
found that shorter interventions had stronger effects,
at least for six months; our study and the study by
Singh et al both found that effects were stronger with
vigorous intensity exercise compared with light and
moderate exercise. However, most existing reviews
found various treatment modalities to be equally
effective. In our review, some types of exercise
had stronger effect sizes than others. We attribute this
to the study level data available in a network metaanalysis compared with an overview of reviews
and higher power compared with meta-analyses with
smaller numbers of included studies. Overviews of
reviews have the ability to more easily cover a wider
range of participants, interventions, and outcomes,
but also risk double counting randomised trials that
are included in separate meta-analyses. They often
include heterogeneous studies without having as
much control over moderation analyses (eg, Singh
et al included studies covering both prevention
and treatment). Some of those reviews grouped
interventions such as yoga with heterogeneous
interventions such as stretching and qigong. This
practise of combining different interventions makes
it harder to interpret meta-analytical estimates. We
used methods that enabled us to separately analyse
the effects of these treatment modalities. In so doing,
we found that these interventions do have different
effects, with yoga being an intervention with strong
effects and stretching being better described as an
active control condition. Network meta-analyses
revealed the same phenomenon with psychotherapy:
researchers once concluded there was a dodo bird
verdict, whereby “everybody has won, and all must
have prizes,” until network meta-analyses showed
some interventions were robustly more effective than
others.
Conclusions.
Depression imposes a considerable global burden.
Many exercise modalities appear to be effective
treatments, particularly walking or jogging, strength
training, and yoga, but confidence in many of the
findings was low. We found preliminary data that may
help practitioners tailor interventions to individuals
(eg, yoga for older men, strength training for younger
women). The World Health Organization recommends
physical activity for everyone, including those with
chronic conditions and disabilities, but not everyone
can access treatment easily. Many patients may
have physical, psychological, or social barriers to
participation. Still, some interventions with few costs,
side effects, or pragmatic barriers, such as walking
and jogging, are effective across people with different
personal characteristics, severity of depression, and
comorbidities. Those who are able may want to choose
more intense exercise in a structured environment to
further decrease depression symptoms. Health systems
may want to provide these treatments as alternatives or
adjuvants to other established interventions (cognitive
behaviour therapy, SSRIs), while also attenuating
risks to physical health associated with depression.
Therefore, effective exercise modalities could be
considered alongside those intervention as core
treatments for depression.