txt_files\exercise_depression_2024_au.txt

 Major depressive disorder is a leading cause of disability worldwide and has been found to lower life satisfaction more than debt, divorce, and diabetes . Access to treatment for many people with depression is limited, with only 51 treatment coverage for high income countries and 20 for low and middle-income countries . Exercise may be an effective complement or alternative to drugs and psychotherapy . In addition to mental health benefits, exercise also improves a range of physical and cognitive outcomes . Authors of guidelines may find it hard to provide consistent recommendations on the basis of existing mainly pairwise meta-analysesthat is assessing a specific modality versus a specific comparator in a distinct group of participants . For example, a large overview of reviews found effects on depression to be proportional to intensity, with vigorous exercise appearing to be better, but a later meta-analysis found no such effects . We searched randomised trials on exercise for depression to ensure our review was adequately powered to identify the optimal dose and modality of exercise for depressed patients .  Exercise showed moderate effects on depression compared with active controls, either alone or in combination with other established treatments such as cognitive behaviour therapy . We defined exercise as planned, structured and repetitive bodily movement done to improve or maintain one or more components of physical fitness . Study selection was based on two previous Cochrane reviews to identify potentially eligible studies for inclusion . A total of 218 unique studies described in 246 reports were included, totalling 495 arms and 14170 participants . Studies excluded if interventions were shorter than one week, depression was not reported as an outcome, and data were insufficient to calculate an effect size for each arm . Any comparison condition was included, allowing us to quantify the effects against established treatments eg, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors SSRIs, cognitive behavioural therapy, placebo tablet, stretching, educational control, and social support, or waitlist control conditions . Findings are presented according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and MetaAnalyses PRISMA-NMA guidelines see supplementary file, section S0 .  In isolation, the most effective exercise modalities were walking or jogging, yoga, strength training, and dancing . Yoga was somewhat more effective among older adults, and strength training was more effective for younger people . The benefits from exercise tended to be proportional to the intensity prescribed, with vigorous activity being better . Benefits were equally effective for different weekly doses, for people with different comorbidities, or for different baseline levels of depression . It is unlikely that any single causal mechanism explains all the findings in the review . Instead, we hypothesise that a combination of social interaction, mindfulness or experiential acceptance, increased self-efficacy, immersion in green spaces, neurobiological mechanisms, and acute positive affect combine to generate outcomes . We argue that understanding these mechanisms of action is important for personalising prescriptions and better understanding effective treatments . Our review included more studies than many existing reviews on exercise for depression. However, most existing reviews found various treatment modalities to be equally effective - some types of exercise had stronger effect sizes than others .  Many exercise modalities appear to be effective treatments, particularly walking or jogging, strength training, and yoga . But confidence in many of the findings was low. This practise of combining different interventions makes it harder to interpret meta-analytical estimates . The World Health Organization recommends physical activity for everyone, including those with chronic conditions and disabilities, but not everyone can access treatment easily . Still, some interventions with few costs, side effects, or pragmatic barriers, such as walking and jogging are effective across people with different personal characteristics, severity of depression, and comorbidities . We found preliminary data that may help practitioners tailor interventions to individuals eg, yoga for older men, Strength training for younger women . Those who are able may want to choose more intense exercise in a structured environment to further decrease depression symptoms . For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 909090 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org for details.