Abstract.
Aim: Persistent depressive disorder (PDD) was first introduced in the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5th edition (DSM-5),
which encompasses numerous
different conditions, including dysthymia, recurrent major depressive disorder,
double depression, and chronic major depression. SSRIs are the first-line
drugs for
treatment of PDD; however, not all patients respond to SSRI treatment.
Case presentation: We describe a woman who was diagnosed with PDD. At the age
of 38, the patient presented with anxiety, reduced energy, marked tiredness, and
sleep disturbances. She was prescribed with three antidepressants (paroxetine, duloxetine,
and mirtazapine), which were not effective in relieving her symptoms. She
was also prescribed bromazepam, which was also not effective. Subsequently, she
was switched to lamotrigine, which resulted in a marked improvement in symptoms.
The antidepressants and bromazepam were gradually tapered and discontinued.
Conclusion: This case demonstrates that lamotrigine may be effective for treating
patients with antidepressant resistant PDD and suggests that it may be a promising
alternative to combination therapy of antidepressants and benzodiazepines in the
treatment of PDD.
INTRODUCTION.
Persistent depressive disorder (PDD) was first introduced in the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5th edition
(DSM-5),
which encompasses numerous different conditions, including
dysthymia (DST), recurrent major depressive disorder, double
depression, and chronic major depression. Since its inception
in the DSM-III,
DST has been widely criticized for its significant heterogeneity of the diagnosis, and these criticisms have continued
with PDD, its latest classification. Several reports have examined the
efficacy and acceptability of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs) and tricyclic antidepressants in the treatment of PDD1 and
have provided evidence for the efficacy of antidepressants in the
treatment of chronic depression. However, reports have shown that
up to two-thirds
of adult patients do not achieve remission with SSRI
treatment. Moreover, there is limited evidence identifying reliable predictors (eg, demographic, clinical, or genetic characteristics) of
individual response.2,3 Therefore, effective treatment of patients
with PDD who do not respond to SSRIs remains elusive.
Here, we report a patient who was diagnosed with PDD who
showed insufficient improvement with a combination therapy of antidepressants
but achieved remission with lamotrigine monotherapy.

CASE REPORT.
The patient was a woman in her 50’s. Her mother, grandmother,
and aunt were diagnosed with major depressive disorder and committed
suicide. She worked in a hospital as a nurse. At the age of
38 years, she began experiencing fatigue and wobble. She visited
a general medicine clinic, but no abnormalities were detected. She
presented with symptoms of depression (eg, depressed mood,
reduced energy, pessimism, and sleep disturbances). She did not
present with hypomanic or manic symptoms, such as mood elevation.
At the psychiatry clinic, she was diagnosed with major depressive
disorder and was started on paroxetine. However, her
symptoms remained unstable, and she remitted and relapsed repeatedly.
Her diagnosis was revised from major depressive disorder
to PDD, and duloxetine and mirtazapine were added to her
treatment when she was aged 45 and 46 years, respectively. She was prescribed maximum doses of paroxetine, duloxetine, and mirtazapine;
however, her symptoms did not improve. Furthermore,
she was prescribed the maximum dose of bromazepam for anxiety,
but her anxiety symptoms persisted. Although the patient had
treatment resistance to antidepressants, she did not experience
severe depressive symptoms (such as suicidal ideation) or psychotic
symptoms (such as delusions); thus, augmentation therapy
with antipsychotics and electroconvulsive therapy were considered
unsuitable. Subsequently, she was treated with lamotrigine
and her symptoms of depressions stabilized. The three antidepressants
were gradually tapered and discontinued. Her anxiety also
improved dramatically, and bromazepam was gradually tapered
and discontinued. Remission was maintained for over 2 years, and
she was reemployed as a care insurance investigator.
Detailed information of the patient's symptoms (measured using
the Cornell Dysthymia Rating Scale4) is summarized in Table 1.

DISCUSSION. Lamotrigine has not showed efficacy in the treatment of unipolar
depression.5,6 This case provided the new findings that lamotrigine
improved unipolar depression resistant to antidepressants and also
improved anxiety symptoms being free from benzodiazepines. Our patient presented with two contradictory aspects: (a) She
met criteria for PDD according to the DSM-5
but did not meet
criteria for bipolar disorder; and (b) although she did not show improvement
with antidepressant treatment, remission was achieved
following therapy with a mood stabilizer, lamotrigine. There are
several guidelines that recommend mood stabilizers for treating patients
with depressive disorder based on the recognition of bipolar
disorder as a broad-spectrum
disorder that encompasses depressive
disorder.7–9
Moreover, PDD is thought to be a predictive factor for
bipolar disorder, alongside family history of bipolar disorder and cyclothymic
temperament.10 Therefore, the concepts of bipolar disorder
and PDD need to be considered carefully.
There has been limited discussion around the use of mood stabilizers
for the treatment of PDD. Most mood stabilizers are effective
for managing manic states, but they are not effective for resolving
depressive states. However, lamotrigine is effective for the treatment
of bipolar depression and has a low risk of manic switch.11
Furthermore, lamotrigine has a therapeutic effect on depressive
cognition and psychomotor retardation in patients with bipolar
depression.12 Therefore, the use of lamotrigine in the treatment of
PDD may be useful in regard to efficacy and safety. In animal models,
the blocking of sodium channels was related to improving depressive
symptom.13
Interestingly, our patient presented with depression-related
anxiety, which also improved with lamotrigine. Anxiety frequently
coexists with depression, and the addition of benzodiazepines to antidepressant
treatment is common practice in treatments for major
depression. Reports have shown that combination therapy with antidepressants
and benzodiazepines is more effective than antidepressant
monotherapy for improving the severity, treatment response,
and remission in the early stages of depression.14 However, in our
case, combination therapy of antidepressants and benzodiazepines
was not effective. Moreover, animal models have revealed that lamotrigine
has an anxiolytic-like
pharmacokinetic profile that may be
related to sodium channels.15 Taken together, we suggest that lamotrigine
is a promising alternative to benzodiazepines in the treatment
of PDD.
The plasma concentration of lamotrigine has not been measured
in this case. Therapeutic response to lamotrigine occurs when its
plasma concentration is higher than 12.7 ?mol/L.16 This response
was derived in 75-100
mg dosage, so our patient might have sufficient
therapeutic effect of lamotrigine with 200 mg.
In summary, our case demonstrated that lamotrigine may be effective
in patients with PDD who are resistant to antidepressants.
Moreover, lamotrigine may be a promising alternative to combination
therapy of antidepressants and benzodiazepines in the treatment
of PDD. Fully understanding the homogeneity and heterogeneity
of bipolar disorder and PDD requires further clinical and biological
investigations. Nevertheless, we believe that our case provides an
opportunity to further our understanding of these disorders.